>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 24: IT'S THE
DEMOCRATS' TURN-- THE PARTY
PREPARES FOR ITS NATIONAL
CONVENTION IN PHILADELPHIA.
WHAT DOES THE PARTY BELIEVE IN?
OUR JEFF GREENFIELD TAKES A
CLOSER LOOK.
AND BATTLEGROUND PENNSYLVANIA--
WILL VOTERS IN COAL COUNTRY GO
FOR CLINTON OR TRUMP?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AS ABOUT 5,000 DELEGATES ARE
DESCENDING ON PHILADELPHIA FOR
THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
CONVENTION THAT STARTS TOMORROW,
THE PARTY IS EXPERIENCING A
CHANGE IN LEADERSHIP.
FLORIDA CONGRESSWOMAN DEBBIE
WASSERMAN-SCHULTZ THE CHAIR OF
THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
COMMITTEE QUIT HER POST TODAY
FOLLOWING THE LEAK OF
EMBARRASSING E-MAILS.
WASSERMAN-SCHULTZ WHO JUST
YESTERDAY INTRODUCED HILLARY
CLINTON AN TIM KAINE AT THE
PARTY, HAD SUCCEEDED KAINE AS
THE PARTY CHAIR FIVE YEARS AGO.
HER RESIGNATION CAME TWO DAYS
AFTER WIKILEAKS RELEASED 19,000
E-MAILS SOME SUGGESTS OFFICIALS
WORKED TO UNDERMINE THE CAMPAIGN
OF VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS IN ONE WASSERMAN-SCHULTZ
CALLED SANDER'S CAMPAIGN MANAGER
A LIAR.
IN ANOTHER PARTY OFFICIALS
SUGGESTED QUESTIONING SANDERS
JEWISH FAITH AS A WEDGE WITH
SOUTHERN VOTERS.
DONNA BRAZIL LONG TIME POLITICAL
STRATEGIST WHO RAN AL GORE'S
CAMPAIGN IN 2 THOUSAND WILL
SERVE AS INTERIM PARTY CHAIR.
EARLIER TODAY HILLARY CLINTON'S
CAMPAIGN MANAGER BLAMED RUSSIAN
HACKERS FOR THE E-MAIL BREACH.
>> EXPERTS ARE TELLING US THAT
RUSSIAN STATE ACTORS BROKE INTO
THE DNC, STOLE THESE E-MAILS AND
OTHER EXPERTS ARE NOW SAYING
THAT THE RUSSIANS ARE RELEASING
THESE E-MAILS FOR THE PURPOSE OF
ACTUALLY HELPING DONALD TRUMP.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TRUMP
CAMPAIGN SPOKESMAN TELLS THE
NEWSHOUR THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN'S
TIME WOULD BE BETTER SPENT
APOLOGIZING TO BERNIE SANDERS
FOR THE MISTREATMENT HE RECEIVED
AT THE HANDS OF THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
JOINING US TO TALK ABOUT THE
IMPLICATIONS OF DEBBIE WASSER
MACHINE SCHULTZ STEPPING DOWN
IS JEFF GREENFIELD.
PUT THIS IN CONTEXT FOR US AT
THE EVE OF THE MAJOR EVENT FOR
THE POLITICAL PARTY, THE
LEADERSHIP CHANGES?
>> YEAH, LIKE THEY SAY ABOUT THE
SECRET OF GOOD COMEDY, TIMING IS
EVERYTHING.
THERE IS A HEAT WAVE HITTING
HERE BUT THAT IS NOTHING
COMPARED TO THE POLITICAL HEAT
THAT WAS RISING AROUND THE DNC
AND THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN IN THE
WAKE OF THOSE REVELATIONS FROM
WIKILEAKS.
THE SANDERS PEOPLE HAD LONG
SUSPECTED THAT THE DNC WAS IN
LEAGUE WITH THE CLINTONS AND
THESE LEAKED DOCUMENTS SEEM TO
UNDERMINE THAT OR SUPPORT IT
THERE WAS NO WAY THE DEMOCRATS
COULD CONDUCT A WEEK LONG
CONVENTION WITH THE CONSTANT
DRUM BEAT OF ANGER AND
DEMANDS THAT DEBBIE
WASSERMAN-SCHULTZ STEP DOWN, SO
SHE FELL ON HER SWORD.
>> Sreenivasan: WE KNOW THE
INTENT OF THE PARTY'S DECISION
HERE, TO TRY TO MAKE THIS
PERHAPS A HEALING MOMENT WHERE
THEY CAN GET OVER THIS Z BUT
DOES THIS POTENTIALLY ADD MORE
FUEL TO THOSE BERNIE SANDERS WHO
FEEL SLIGHTED THROUGHOUT THE
ENTIRE PROCESS?
>> LOOK, IT'S POSSIBLE THAT THEY
THINK THAT HAVING SCORED ONE
KILL, THEY MAY START RATCHETING
UP DEMANDS, MAYBE TRYING TO
REFOCUS ON THE SUPERDELEGATE
ISSUE.
BUT THE OTHER PART IS THAT THE
DEMOCRATS HAVE MADE MUCH SPORT
OUT OF ALL THE STUMBLES ON THE
REPUBLICAN CAMPAIGN, THE
PLAGIARISM, THE TED CRUZ BLOWUP,
ALL THAT STUFF.
IT'S VERY HARD FOR THE
DEMOCRATS TO ARGUE, WE KNOW HOW
TO RUN A CAMPAIGN.
WE KNOW HOW TO RUN A CONVENTION,
THEREFORE WE KNOW HOW TO RUN THE
COUNTRY.
SO I THINK WE'RE NOT LIKELY TO
SEE THE END OF THE TURMOIL BUT
AT LEAST THE MOST VISIBLE
TARGET HAS NOW BEEN REMOVED.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS, DOES IT
AFFECT THE SPEAKER LINE-UP.
IS THERE LIKELY TO BE A CHANGE
THAT THE AUDIENCE AT HOME SEES?
>> NO.
I THINK THE CONVENTION WILL GO
ON AS PLANNED.
THEY'VE GOT THEIR 60 PLUS
SPEAKERS.
THERE IS NO REASON WHY THE
REMOVAL OF SCHULTZ SHOULD CAUSE
ANY CHANGE IN THAT.
THE QUESTION, AND YOU RAISED IT
EARLIER, IS THIS GOING TO
EMBOLDEN THE SANDERS PEOPLE TO
TRY TO MAKE FLOOR FIGHTS OUT OF
ISSUES THAT THEY IN THE PAST
HAVE SAID OKAY, WE'LL SETTLE
THIS IN COMMITTEE.
I WISH I COULD TILL THE ANSWER
TO THAT BUT AS I OFTEN SAID, IF
I COULD SEE THE FUTURE, I WOULD
BUY THE POWERBALL TICKET.
>> PEOPLE FORGET SOMETIMES THAT
NOT ONLY IS THIS A PLACE FOR
SPEECHES, BUT THIS IS ACTUALLY
THE PLACE WHERE THE PARTY
PLATFORM GETS HAMMERED OUT.
WHETHER BERNIE SANDERS HAS SOME
INFLUENCE ON THIS ENTIRE
PROCESS, IT'S ACTUALLY HAPPENING
IN COMMITTEE MEETINGS THAT ARE
VERY BORING AND LONG AND DON'T
REALLY GET NATIONAL PRIME TIME
TELEVISION ATTENTION.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
UNLESS THE SANDERS PEOPLE DECIDE
TO TAKE THE POWER THEY HAVE AND
NOW FORCE A FLOOR FIGHT.
IT IS POSSIBLE THAT ON A COUPLE
OF THESE ISSUES WHICH SOMETIMES
DO MAKE THE EYES GLAZE OVER,
THEY WILL HAVE THAT POWER.
THE IME NOW IS IS THE
RESIGNATION OF SCHULTZ ENOUGH
FOR THEM TO SAY LET'S MOVE ON OR
WHETHER THERE ARE, WE WON'T CALL
THEM NEVER TRUMPERS OR NEVER
CLINTONITES BUT THE KIND OF
HARD-BITTEN OPPONENTS OF THE
ESTABLISHMENT DEMOCRATS, ARE
THEY GOING TO SAY YOU KNOW WHAT,
LET'S GO FOR ANOTHER KILL.
AND THAT'S NOT WHAT SECRETARY
CLINTON OR THE DEMOCRAT NATIONAL
COMMITTEE WANTS TO HEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF
GREENFIELD, JOINING US FROM
PHILADELPHIA TONIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> NICE TO BE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK'S
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION
WILL HAVE A "BACK TO THE FUTURE"
FEEL AS ANOTHER CLINTON BECOMES
A PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE.
BUT THE PARTY OF TODAY IS NOT
THE SAME AS THE PARTY OF THE
1990S.
ONCE AGAIN, JEFF GREENFIELD.
>> IN THE NAME OF THE HARD-
WORKING AMERICANS WHO MAKE UP
OUR FORGOTTEN MIDDLE CLASS, I
PROUDLY ACCEPT YOUR NOMINATION
FOR PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.
>> WHEN I LOOK OUT AT ALL OF
YOU, YOU KNOW WHAT I SEE?
I SEE AMERICA'S FUTURE!
>> Reporter: 100 MILES AND 24
YEARS SEPARATES THE 1992
CONVENTION IN NEW YORK FROM THE
ONE THAT OPEN HERE IN
PHILADELPHIA ON MONDAY.
BUT THE DISTANCE IS FAR GREATER
THAN A MATTER OF MILES OR YEARS.
DESPITE THE FAMILIAL LINK, THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY THAT WILL
NOMINATE THE SECOND CLINTON IS
SHARPLY DIFFERENT IN MAKEUP AND
PHILOSOPHY FROM THE ONE THAT
NOMINATED THE FIRST.
BILL CLINTON'S CAMPAIGN WAS
BASED ON THE IDEA THAT VOTERS
DID NOT TRUST THE DEMOCRATS WITH
THEIR SAFETY OR THEIR MONEY.
HE PROMISED A DIFFERENT AGENDA;
MIDDLE CLASS TAX RELIEF, ENDING
WELFARE AS WE KNEW IT, TOUGHER
ON CRIME, PRO-DEATH PENALTY.
BILL GALSTON WAS A KEY ARCHITECT
OF THAT AGENDA.
>> THE MOVE TOWARDS FISCAL
RESTRAINT AND A BALANCED BUDGET,
WHICH YIELDED FOUR YEARS OF
SURPLUSES.
A FOCUS ON EDUCATION REFORM, NOT
JUST EDUCATION INVESTMENT.
WELFARE REFORM.
THE TRADE AGENDA, WHICH INCLUDED
NOT JUST NAFTA, BUT ALSO THE
W.T.O.
>> Reporter: THE DEMOCRATS IN
PHILADELPHIA ARE STRIKING
SHARPLY DIFFERENT NOTES.
THE PLATFORM CALLS FOR: ENDING
MASS INCARCERATION, ABOLISHING
THE DEATH PENALTY, FREE COLLEGE
TUITION FOR MILLIONS, CRACKING
DOWN ON BIG BANKS, A PUBLIC
OPTION FOR HEALTHCARE, AND THE
RIGHT TO AN ABORTION WITHOUT
RESTRICTIONS.
INSTEAD OF BILL CLINTON'S "WALL
OF BLUE," MOTHERS WHOSE SONS AND
DAUGHTERS WERE KILLED BY POLICE
WILL SPEAK HERE.
>> CERTAINLY, A BILL CLINTON
CONVENTION WOULD NEVER HAVE
THOUGHT OF HAVING THOSE TYPE OF
SPEAKERS.
>> Reporter: ED RENDELL, FORMER
PHILADELPHIA MAYOR, PENNSYLVANIA
GOVERNOR, AND NATIONAL PARTY
CHAIR.
>> THERE'S NO QUESTION THE LEFT
WING IS MORE PROGRESSIVE.
IT'S MORE ACTIVE; IT'S MORE INTO
ADVOCACY THAN IT EVER HAS BEEN.
>> Reporter: I REMEMBER BILL
CLINTON SAYING ENDLESSLY, AND
HILLARY TOO, ABORTION SHOULD BE
SAFE, LEGAL AND RARE.
THAT'S NOT IN THE PLATFORM.
RARE IS OUT.
>> WE'VE BECOME, THE PROGRESSIVE
WING OF THE PARTY IS MORE
DOMINANT THAN IT'S BEEN.
>> Reporter: ONE REASON IS
DEMOGRAPHICS.
RACIAL MINORITIES, VOTERS UNDER
40, AND COLLEGE-EDUCATED WHITES
ARE AN INCREASINGLY DOMINANT
FORCE.
WHEN BILL CLINTON WON REELECTION
IN 1996, HE LOST THE WHITE VOTE
TO BOB DOLE BY JUST THREE
PERCENTAGE POINTS.
BARACK OBAMA WON REELECTION IN
2012 DESPITE LOSING THE WHITE
VOTE BY 20 POINTS TO MITT
ROMNEY.
OBAMA WON WITH HUGE MAJORITIES
OF BLACKS, HISPANICS, AND
ASIANS, WHO ARE NOW A BIGGER
SLICE OF THE ELECTORATE.
>> AND NOW WE ARE THE BIG-TENT
PARTY AND WE REPRESENT THE
BREADTH AND THE DIVERSITY OF
THIS COUNTRY, AND HERE I AM, AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN FROM
C.E.O.
BROOKLYN, NEW YORK, AS THE
>> Reporter: CONVENTION C.E.O.
LEAH DAUGHTRY SAY THE CHANGING
APPROACH TO AN ISSUE LIKE CRIME
REFLECTS A CHANGING REALITY.
>> IN THOSE DAYS WHEN PRESIDENT
CLINTON WAS ADVANCING THE CRIME
BILL, EVERYBODY WAS IN AN UPROAR
ABOUT THE CRACK EPIDEMIC THAT
WAS SWEEPING ACROSS THE COUNTRY,
AND EVERYBODY WANTED SOMETHING
DONE ABOUT IT.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S,
IT IS A MARK OF THE CLINTONS TO
SAY, YOU KNOW, LOOKING BACK, NO
IT WAS NOT THE RIGHT THING.
>> Reporter: THERE IS, OF
COURSE, ANOTHER REASON WHY THE
DEMOCRATS HAVE MOVED LEFT.
>> THIS TYPE OF RIGGED ECONOMY
IS NOT WHAT AMERICA IS SUPPOSED
TO BE ABOUT.
>> Reporter: VERMONT'S BERNIE
SANDERS, THE ONLY AVOWED
SOCIALIST IN SENATE, MOUNTED A
SURPRISINGLY STRONG PRIMARY
CHALLENGE TO CLINTON, WINNING 12
MILLION VOTES AND MORE THAN
1,800 CONVENTION DELEGATES.
COLORADO DELEGATE TERRY TUCKER
WAS ONE OF THEM.
>> THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY WAS
ALWAYS A PARTY OF THE PEOPLE.
IT'S BECOME SO MUCH LIKE THE
OTHER PARTY IN MANY RESPECTS--
THE WAY YOU CHASE THE BIG MONEY,
THE WAY THE ESTABLISHMENT, THE
ELITE, CHOOSE WHICH CANDIDATES
ARE GOING TO BE PUT FORWARD.
WE LOST OUR ROOTS, AND WE NEED
TO GET BACK THERE.
>> Reporter: BILL GALSTON SAYS
HILLARY CLINTON IS WALKING A
TIGHTROPE BETWEEN THE PAST AND
THE PRESENT.
>> SHE UNDERSTANDS THAT THE
PARTY IS NOTHING LIKE THE PARTY
THAT NOMINATED AND THEN HELPED
TO ELECT HER HUSBAND.
>> Reporter: HER CHALLENGE IS
CRYSTALLIZED BY SANDERS
SUPPORTERS LIKE TERRY TUCKER.
SO IF I COULD GET YOU IN A TIME
MACHINE, AND YOU SOMEHOW COULD
TRAVEL BACK TO 1992, WHAT WOULD
YOU TELL THEM WAS GOING TO
HAPPEN TO THEIR PARTY 24 YEARS
LATER WHEN THERE'S ANOTHER
CLINTON UP?
>> I BELIEVE THERE WERE SOME
PEOPLE THAT WERE TRYING TO TELL
THEM THAT YOU'RE SHUTTING OUT A
HUGE PART OF THE PARTY, AND IT'S
GOING TO HAVE CONSEQUENCES.
>> Reporter: BUT IF THEY SAY TO
YOU KNOW WHAT, WE DID PUT A TWO-
TERM DEMOCRAT IN THE WHITE
HOUSE, SO MAYBE BILL CLINTON WAS
ONTO SOMETHING?
>> YOU'VE GOT WINNING ELECTIONS
DOWN.
BUT WHEN DID WINNING ELECTIONS
MEAN THAT AS A POLITICAL PARTY
WE DON'T DO THE RIGHT THING?
>> Sreenivasan: PENNSYLVANIA IS
A PERENNIAL BATTLEGROUND STATE,
BUT ALSO ONE THAT HAS ENDED UP
IN THE DEMOCRATIC COLUMN EVERY
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION SINCE
1992.
THIS NOVEMBER, DONALD TRUMP SEES
AN OPENING IN PENNSYLVANIA'S
COAL COUNTRY-- THE STATE'S
WESTERN COUNTIES WHERE
UNEMPLOYMENT IS A FEW PERCENTAGE
POINTS ABOVE THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE, AND WHERE MANY COAL
MINERS AND THEIR FAMILIES FEEL
THEIR WAY OF LIFE AND STANDARD
OF LIVING IS UNDER SIEGE.
AS SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT, CHRIS
BURY REPORTS IN TONIGHT'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, COAL COUNTRY
VOTERS WANT TO KNOW WHETHER
EITHER CANDIDATE CAN EVER BRING
THOSE JOBS BACK.
>> Reporter: DAVE WHIPKEY, NOW
64 AND RETIRED, SPENT MUCH OF
HIS LIFE WORKING AT A
PENNSYLVANIA COAL MINE.
IT WAS DIFFICULT, DANGEROUS
WORK, BUT IN 38 YEARS AT THE
MINE, WHIPKEY WAS ABLE TO
PROVIDE WELL FOR HIS FAMILY.
WITH OVERTIME, HE WAS EARNING
CLOSE TO $75,000 A YEAR WHEN HE
RETIRED IN 2014.
>> WHEN YOU'RE FIRST HIRED IN
THE MINE, YOU GO UNDERGROUND,
AND IT'S DIFFERENT, IT'S NEAT.
AFTER YOU'RE THERE A MONTH, YOU
LOOK AROUND AND YOU THINK, "WHAT
AM I DOING HERE?"
IF YOU CAN GET PAST THAT PHASE
OF IT, THEN YOU'RE OKAY.
>> Reporter: THE EMERALD MINE,
WHERE WHIPKEY WORKED, LIES IN
NEARBY WAYNESBURG, A COAL TOWN
TUCKED IN THE APPALACHIAN
MOUNTAINS OF WESTERN
PENNSYLVANIA.
LAST YEAR EMERALD'S OWNER, ALPHA
NATURAL RESOURCES, FILED FOR
BANKRUPTCY AND THEN SHUT DOWN
THE MINE, ONE OF FIVE MINES IN
THE AREA TO CLOSE RECENTLY.
TO MAKE MATTERS WORSE, WHIPKEY
AND HIS WIFE JUST FOUND OUT
THEIR HEALTH INSURANCE WILL
EXPIRE NEXT YEAR.
>> WE WERE PROMISED HEALTH CARE
FROM CRADLE TO GRAVE.
AND NOW YOU HAVE TO WONDER,
' ¡HOW
MUCH LONGER AM I GOING TO HAVE
MEDICAL AND WHAT HAPPENS AFTER
THAT?'
AND IT'S A WORRY, IT REALLY IS.
>> Reporter: HE'S WORRIED THE
PENSION THE COMPANY PROMISED HIM
COULD BE IN JEOPARDY, TOO.
>> ALL THE YEARS THAT YOU WORK
TO BUILD YOUR PENSION.
AND THEN THEY'RE GOING TO CUT
IT.
IT'S NOT FAIR.
>> Reporter: IN PLACES LIKE
GREENE COUNTY, ONE OF THE
NATION'S BIGGEST COAL PRODUCERS,
THE ECONOMIC DAMAGE HAS BEEN
PROFOUND AND PAINFUL.
WHEN THE EMERALD MINE CLOSED
LAST NOVEMBER, MORE THAN 230
UNION MINEWORKERS LOST GOOD
PAYING JOBS WITH GENEROUS
BENEFITS.
AND THE IMPACT IS CASCADING
AROUND THE REGION.
IN JUST THE LAST FIVE YEARS,
MORE THAN 30,000 MINE WORKERS
NATIONWIDE HAVE SEEN THEIR JOBS
DISAPPEAR.
>> BACK IN THE EARLY DAYS, COAL
MINING WAS JUST EVERYWHERE.
>> Reporter: MINERS LIKE 41 YEAR
OLD BRIAN SCHAUM LOST THEIR JOBS
AT EMERALD MINE AS U.S. COAL
PRODUCTION WAS FALLING TO ITS
LOWEST LEVEL IN 35 YEARS.
HE GREW UP IN GREENE COUNTY, A
COAL MINER LIKE HIS FATHER,
UNCLE, AND BROTHER.
WHEN HE LOST HIS JOB, HE LOST A
NEARLY SIX FIGURE INCOME.
>> WHEN THEY LAID OFF UP THERE,
I WAS AT LIKE $29 AN HOUR.
THE OVERTIME WAS JUST AS MUCH AS
I WANTED.
I MEAN I COULD WRITE MY OWN
CHECK.
>> Reporter: NOW HE'S GETTING BY
DOING ODD JOBS AND REMODELING
HOMES.
DOES IT PAY ANYTHING LIKE WHAT
YOU WERE USED TO IN THE MINE?
>> NO, BUT IT HELPS PUT A LITTLE
BIT OF FOOD ON THE TABLE.
SO I MEAN, IT'S A REAL
ADJUSTMENT RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: THE ADJUSTMENT
COMES AT A TIME WHEN THE
INDUSTRY IS FIGHTING PROPOSED
REGULATIONS BY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION.
THE PRESIDENT HAS ASKED THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
TO IMPLEMENT A "CLEAN POWER
PLAN" TO REDUCE EARTH-WARMING
CARBON GAS EMISSIONS FROM COAL
FIRED POWER PLANTS.
OVER THE LAST SIX YEARS,
ELECTRICITY PRODUCED BY COAL HAS
FALLEN FROM 45% TO 31% OF THE
NATION'S POWER GENERATION.
>> THE COAL COMPANIES BLAMED
THIS TOTALLY AND COMPLETELY ON
OBAMA AND THE EPA.
>> Reporter: ED YANKOVICH, WHO
HEADS THE REGIONAL DISTRICT OF
THE UNITED MINE WORKERS OF
AMERICA UNION SAYS STRICTER EPA
RULES HAVE PLAYED A ROLE IN
COAL'S DECLINE, BUT BELIEVES
THAT MARKET FORCES, INCLUDING
CHEAP NATURAL GAS AND A DROP IN
COAL DEMAND FROM CHINA, ARE ALSO
A FACTOR.
YANKOVICH SAYS COAL COMPANIES
SCAPEGOAT THE PRESIDENT.
>> THE COAL OPERATORS THEMSELVES
DID A VERY GOOD JOB OF MAKING
PEOPLE, YOU KNOW, LABELING HIM
AS ANTI-COAL, WAR ON COAL.
>> Reporter: HAS THAT RESONATED
HERE?
>> YES, IT'S RESONATED HERE.
SURE IT'S RESONATED HERE.
PEOPLE WANT AN ENEMY.
THEY WANT SOMEONE TO POINT A
FINGER TO."
YOU'RE THE REASON WHY THIS ALL
HAPPENED."
>> Reporter: THE MINE WORKERS
UNION ENDORSED BARACK OBAMA IN
2008, BUT DID NOT BACK OBAMA IN
2012, AND A TOP UNION OFFICIAL
SAYS THE UNION IS NOT LIKELY TO
ENDORSE ANY PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE THIS YEAR.
>> IF THEY DON'T WANT TO BACK
SOMEBODY, THAT'S THEIR OPINION.
I KNOW WHO I'M BACKING, AND I
KNOW A LOT OF COAL MINER
BROTHERS OUT THERE, AND I KNOW
WHO THEY'RE BACKING.
>> Reporter: TRUMP?
>> TRUMP.
AT LEAST HE'S GIVING ME A
GLIMMER OF HOPE RIGHT NOW THAT
IT COULD CHANGE AND GET BETTER.
AS TO WHERE DEMOCRATS AIN'T EVEN
GIVING ME A GLIMMER OF HOPE.
IT'S JUST WE'RE OUT, AND THAT'S
IT.
>> Reporter: BY NOT SAYING THEY
ENDORSE A CANDIDATE, WHAT DOES
THAT TELL YOU?
>> THAT THEY'RE NOT ENDORSING
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY, WHICH
MEANS THEY'RE LEANING TOWARDS
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY BY NOT
SAYING IT.
>> Reporter: IN GREENE COUNTY,
WHERE THE POPULATION IS 95%
WHITE, REGISTERED DEMOCRATS
STILL OUTNUMBER REGISTERED
REPUBLICANS, BUT THAT ADVANTAGE
IS SHRINKING.
VOTERS HERE HAVE FAVORED THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE IN THE LAST THREE
ELECTIONS, BUT THE DEMOCRAT
CARRIED PENNSYLVANIA EVERY TIME.
FOR DONALD TRUMP TO REVERSE THAT
RESULT, HE WILL NEED TO RUN UP
THE VOTE IN WHITE, WORKING CLASS
COUNTIES IN COAL COUNTRY.
>> WE'RE GOING TO PUT THE MINERS
BACK TO WORK.
WE'RE GOING TO PUT THE MINERS
BACK TO WORK!
>> Reporter: AT THE REPUBLICAN
NATIONAL CONVENTION, DELEGATES
APPROVED A PLATFORM CALLING
COAL"
AN ABUNDANT, CLEAN, AFFORDABLE,
RELIABLE DOMESTIC ENERGY
RESOURCE."
AND, IN HIS FIRST SPEECH AS
TRUMP'S RUNNING MATE, INDIANA
GOVERNOR MIKE PENCE ATTACKED
HILLARY CLINTON'S STANCE ON
COAL.
>> WHERE DONALD TRUMP SUPPORTS
AN ALL OF THE ABOVE STRATEGY AND
WILL END THE WAR ON COAL,
HILLARY CLINTON ACTUALLY
PROMISED AN ENERGY PLAN THAT
WOULD CLOSE AMERICAN COAL MINES
AND PUT COAL MINERS OUT OF WORK.
>> Reporter: CLINTON HAS
PROMISED TO SPEND $30 BILLION
DOLLARS FOR RETRAINING DISPLACED
COAL MINERS AND OTHER ENERGY
WORKERS.
BUT THIS COMMENT AT A MARCH TOWN
HALL WAS TAKEN AS A THREAT.
>> I'M THE ONLY CANDIDATE WHICH
HAS A POLICY ABOUT BRINGING
OPPORTUNITY USING CLEAN
RENEWABLE ENERGY AS THE KEY INTO
COAL COUNTRY, BECAUSE WE'RE
GOING TO PUT A LOT OF COAL
MINERS AND COAL COMPANIES OUT OF
BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: DID SHE SHOOT
HERSELF IN THE FOOT WITH THAT
COMMENT?
>> WELL, YEAH, YES.
SHE DID.
SHE HURT HERSELF SIGNIFICANTLY.
THAT'S TRUE.
>> Reporter: UNION LEADERS LIKE
YANKOVICH ARE ALSO WARY OF TRUMP
BECAUSE, THEY SAY, HE OFFERS FEW
DETAILS TO BACK UP HIS VAGUE
PROMISES ABOUT REVITALIZING THE
COAL INDUSTRY.
CAN TRUMP BRING THAT BACK?
>> I DON'T BELIEVE HE CAN.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT PLAN HE HAS.
IF HE'S GOING TO DO IT, I'D LIKE
TO SEE THAT PLAN.
>> Reporter: UNEMPLOYED COAL
MINER BRIAN SCHAUM, WHO HAS
TRADITIONALLY VOTED DEMOCRATIC,
BELIEVES TRUMP'S WORD.
>> I'M LEANING TOWARDS
REPUBLICANS SIMPLY BECAUSE HE'S
MY ONLY HOPE TO BRING BACK GOOD
WAGE JOBS HERE.
THAT'S BEEN HIS THING, GET THE
COAL INDUSTRY UP AND RUNNING
AGAIN.
SO I GOT TO GO WITH WHAT HE'S
SAYING.
>> REMEMBER THAT JOB YOU APPLIED
FOR, THAT TRUCK DRIVING JOB?
>> Reporter: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION IS OFFERING SOME
ASSISTANCE WITH MORE THAN $30
MILLION IN GRANTS TO HELP FORMER
COAL AND POWER WORKERS IN TWELVE
STATES SINCE LAST YEAR.
DAVE SEROCK, A LOCAL UNION
LEADER WHO LOST HIS JOB AT THE
EMERALD MINE, NOW WORKS AS A
COUNSELOR FOR AN ORGANIZATION
HELPING FORMER COAL WORKERS
FIND, AND TRAIN FOR, NEW JOBS.
SEROCK'S SAYS HE'S TAKEN A
$70,000 PAY CUT.
>> THE BIGGEST THING IS, I
THINK, THE PRESSURE THAT IT PUTS
ON THE INDIVIDUAL KNOWING THAT
IT WENT FROM HERE, AND NOW
YOU'RE HERE, AND THERE'S NOT A
WHOLE LOT YOU CAN DO ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: YOUR STANDARD OF
LIVING HAS CHANGED?
>> OH, DEFINITELY.
>> Reporter: RE-TRAINING IS A
TOUGH SELL TO UNEMPLOYED MINERS
WHO CANNOT AFFORD TO SPEND ONE
OR TWO YEARS LEARNING A NEW
TRADE: THEIR UNEMPLOYMENT
BENEFITS END AFTER SIX MONTHS.
>> HOW DO YOU PAY YOUR BILLS IN
THE MEANTIME WHILE YOU'RE GOING?
PART-TIME JOB IS JUST NOT GOING
TO BE ENOUGH TO SUPPORT THEM,
EVEN IF THEY MAKE CUTS.
>> Reporter: THE NEW JOBS, LIKE
DRIVING TRUCKS, PAY FAR LESS
THAN MINING AND OFTEN LACK THE
HEALTH CARE AND OTHER BENEFITS
EARNED BY UNION COAL MINERS.
>> MOST OF OUR JOBS THAT WE'RE
FINDING FOR OUR GUYS THAT WERE
LAID OFF, YOU'RE LOOKING AT $10
TO $20 AN HOUR, AND $20 AN HOUR
IS ON THE HIGH SIDE.
RIPPLING THROUGH GREENE COUNTY,
WHICH DEPENDS ON MINING AND
RELATED INDUSTRIES FOR NEARLY A
THIRD OF ITS TAX REVENUE.
ED HINERMAN OWNS THE LOCAL NAPA
AUTO PARTS DEALERSHIP.
WHAT ARE YOU DOWN HERE?
>> OKAY, WELL UP TO 30% OFF, OUR
BUSINESS IS OFF BY 30%.
>> Reporter: MINES ARE STILL
PRODUCING COAL IN GREENE COUNTY,
AND SOME MINERS HOPE TO GET
THEIR JOBS BACK.
BRIAN SCHAUM ISN'T WAITING FOR
THAT TO HAPPEN.
HE'S GOTTEN A CRANE OPERATOR
LICENSE AND IS THINKING OF
MOVING HIS FAMILY TO FLORIDA.
>> I JUST DON'T SEE IT ALL
REBOUNDING.
THE MINING INDUSTRY ALWAYS HAS
ITS UPS AND DOWNS, BUT THIS IS
PROBABLY THE WORST IT'S COME
ACROSS.
AND ONCE IT ALL DIES OFF HERE,
THIS PLACE, THERE AIN'T GOING TO
BE NOTHING LEFT HERE.
>> Reporter: FOR DAVE WHIPKEY,
THE SECURE RETIREMENT HE SPENT
FOUR DECADES BUILDING-- WITH
THAT PENSION AND LIFETIME HEALTH
CARE--- IS SUDDENLY ON SHAKY
GROUND.
>> THE HOUSE THAT WE JUST BOUGHT
TWO YEARS AGO, IF THEY CUT ALL
THAT, WE'RE PROBABLY PUTTING OUR
HOUSE UP FOR SALE.
BECAUSE WE JUST CAN'T-- WE'RE
GETTING BY NOW, BUT WE'RE SURE
NOT GETTING RICH.
>> Reporter: DO YOU SEE COAL
EVER COMING BACK HERE?
>> YES.
YES I DO.
THEY CLOSED EMERALD MINE DOWN,
THEY SAID THERE WAS NO MORE
COAL.
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT.
THERE'S COAL.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS COUPLE
STARTED A NONPROFIT IN
PENNSYLVANIA THAT TEACHES LAID-
OFF COAL MINERS AND OTHERS HOW
TO CODE.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THEIR STORY AT
pbs.org/newshour.
THE LOS ANGELES FIRE DEPARTMENT
SAYS ABOUT 1,500 HOMES AND 100
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS ARE
THREATENED BY A THREE-DAY OLD
WILDFIRE IN THE HILLS NORTH OF
THE CITY.
MORE THAN 1,000 FIREFIGHTERS
HAVE BATTLED THE BLAZE HAT HAS
BURNED MORE THAN 30 SQUARE MILES
OF BONE-DRY BRUSH AND FORCED
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE TO EVACUATE.
HIGH WINDS AND TEMPERATURES
AROUND 100 DEGREES MAKING THE
FIRE NEAR SANTA CLARITA HARD TO
CONTROL.
OFFICIALS SAY IT IS ONLY 10%
CONTAINED.
HEALTH OFFICIALS ARE WARNING
PEOPLE WITH RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
TO STAY INDOORS BECAUSE OF THE
BLACK SMOKE AND ASH SPREADING
OVER LOS ANGELES.
GERMAN OFFICIALS SAY THE 18
YEAR OLD GUNMAN WHO KILLED NINE
PEOPLE AND THEN HIMSELF ON
FRIDAY MAY HAVE BEEN BEEN
PLANNING HIS ATTACK SINCE LAST
SUMMER.
FOLLOWING A SEARCH OF THE
APARTMENT ALI LIVED IN WITH HIS
PARENTS, THE POLICE CHIEF SAID
HE VISITED AND TOOK PICTURES OF
A SCHOOL IN OTHER GERMAN CITY
WHERE A MASS SHOOTER KILLED 16
PEOPLE IN 2009.
THEY SAY HE PROBABLY PURCHASED
HIS NINE MILLIMETER GLOCK ON THE
DARK NET.
GERMANY'S VICE CHANCELLOR AND
INTERIOR MINISTER CALLED FOR
TIGHTENING THE COUNTRY'S
ALREADY STRICT GUN CONTROL LAWS
TO REQUIRE PSYCHIATRIC
EVALUATIONS OF BUYERS UNDER 25.
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP WHERE
ISIS IS CLAIMING RESPONSIBLE FOR
A SUICIDE BOMBING TODAY IN
IRAQ'S CAPITAL, AT LEAST 14
PEOPLE KILLED AND ANOTHER 30
WOUNDED IN THE ATTACK.
AT A SECURITY CHECKPOINT IN
NORTHERN BAGHDAD.
IN THE ONLINE STATEMENT ISIS
SAID IT TARGETED A GATHERING OF
SECURITY OFFICERS AT A BUSY
ENTRANCE TO A SHIITE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THE BOOMER ARRIVED ON FOOT AND
KILLED BOTH OFFICERS AND
CIVILIANS.
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT WARPLANES
BOMBED FIVE HOSPITALS IN AND
AROUND THE REBEL HELD CITY OF
ALEPPO.
THE BRITISH-BASED SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAID THE AIR STRIKES KILLED FIVE
PEOPLE AND FORCED THE HOSPITALS
TO SUSPEND THEIR SERVICES.
ACCORDING TO PHYSICIANS FOR
HUMAN RIGHTS, 750 MEDICAL
PERSONNEL HAVE BEEN KILLED IN
ATTACKS ON MEDICAL FACILITIES IN
SYRIA'S FIVE YEAR CIVIL WAR.
THERE WILL BE RUSSIAN ATHLETES
AT THE SUMMER OLYMPIC GAMES
AFTER ALL, JUST TWO WEEKS BEFORE
THE GAMES BEGIN IN RIO, BRAZIL,
THE INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE REJECTED A PROPOSED
TOTAL BAN OF RUSSIAN ATHLETES
OVER A DOPING SCANDAL.
INSTEAD THE IOC WILL LET EACH OF
THE 28 FEDERATIONS FOR DIFFERENT
SPORTS DECIDE WHICH RUSSIAN
ATHLETES MAY COMPETE.
IOC CHIEF BATCH SAID AN-- BACH
SAID AN ATHLETE SHOULD NOT
SUFFER FROM A SYSTEM IN WHICH HE
WAS NOT IMPLICATED.
THE VOTE CAME AFTER A
INVESTIGATION CONFIRMED
PERVASIVE DOPING OF ATHLETES
FROM RUSSIA IN WINTER AND SUMMER
SPORTS FROM 2011 TO LAST YEAR.
ANY RUSSIAN ATHLETE PREVIOUSLY
SANCTIONED WON'T BE ALLOWED TO
COMPETE.
THE HEAD OF THE U.S. ANTI-DOPING
AGENCY WHO HAD BEEN CALLING FOR
A COMPLETE BAN SAID THE IOC
DECISION IS A SIGNIFICANT BLOW
TO THE RIGHTS OF CLEAN ATHLETES.
>> FINALLY AFTER MONTHS OF
SPECULATION, YAHOO HAS BEEN
SOLD.
VERIZON COMMUNICATIONS, THE
LARGEST WIRELESS CARRIER IN THE
U.S. HAS AGREED TO BUY YAHOO'S
INTERNET BUSINESS AND LAND
HOLDINGS FOR $4.8 BILLION.
VERIZON IS EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE
DETAILS OF THE SALE TOMORROW.
YAHOO PIONEERED THE INTERNET
SEARCH ENGINE BUSINESS AND WAS
ONCE VALUED AT MORE THAN $125
BILLION.
BUT THE COMPANY STRUGGLED AMIDST
THE RISE OF GOOGLE AND FACEBOOK
CAUSING YAHOO'S AD REVENUE TO
PLUNGE.
STAY WITH THE NEWSHOUR STARTING
TOMORROW FOR CONTINUING COVERAGE
OF THE DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL
CONVENTION FROM PHILADELPHIA
LEAD BY GWEN IFILL AND JUDY
WOODRUFF, THAT'S IT FOR THIS
EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M
HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.